Manipur clashes
- inhabited by 3 communities majorly Meiteis( non tribal)in majority and kuki, naga(both tribal) in 

minority. 
-clash related to passing of Protection of Manipur Peoples bill, Manipur Land Revenue &Land Reforms

(seventh amendment) bill and  -Manipur Shop &Establishment(second amendment) bill 
- The bills were passed on the demand of Meiteis to introduce ILP(inner line permit) to restrict in 

migration as they fear of being reduced to minority.
-ILP is currently in operation in Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh. Under it outsider need 

pass or permit to travel within a state for a particular period of time.
- origin under british to protect their commercial interest in oil and tea in north east 
-after 1947 continue to protect tribal culture.
-discontinued in Assam in 1950(Manipur then was part of Assam).

reasons for clashes 
1. Kukis and nagas say Meiteis through reform want to have an access to hill areas inhabited by them 
2. as per kuku naga ILP can be used by Meitei community to declare them outsiders as bill provision 

very strict to declare as Manipuri.
3.Manipuri officially a non tribal state therefore demand for ILP is not justified on
constitutional basis 
4. Protection of Manipur People bill defines Manipur people as those whom name is enumerated in all 

three registers( National Register of Citizens 1951, Census report 1951 and Village Directory 1951) 

and their descendents. Thus exclusion of name from even one will disqualify a person to be termed as 

a Manipuri.
5. The Manipur was granted statehood in 1972, this means that those who came in state between 1951 

and 1972 according to 3 registers will be termed as outsiders stripping them from benefits of 

state’s quota in government jobs, education etc
6. Experts feel that clashes are because of not properly explaining the bills to people. 
-In fact buying the land by outsider
has made more stringent(earlier only approval of a section of cabinet needed but now whole cabinet 

need to give approval) and also buying of land belonging to tribal by a non tribal needs approval of 

deputy commissioner concerned. Tribal areas are also not disturbed under new bills.
-AFPSA and  greater nagalim demand

decentralization under 6th schedule is solution.
